h1. Change Space

h4. Navigate OSX Lion desktops as if they were a 2D grid of spaces

h2. The problem

In OSX Lion Apple dispensed with the simple and effective 2D spaces grids many people loved and relied on.

In its place, there is the more dynamic concept of 'Desktops', which can be created by the system on the fly, for instance when running a full screen app. Also, the system can re-order the desktops according to your use.

These dynamic features are of little use to power users, who know where their apps and windows are, and like to navigate fast between them. A common layout is a 3x3 grid - then from the central space you can reach 4 others with just one keypress. Very useful for flicking between your code editor, and the browser, and perhaps mail, or iTunes for instance.

h2. The solution

To solve the problem, we must check a few settings, configure the correct number of desktops for a grid, and install this app which maps 4 directional hotkeys to move to the correct desktop as if there really were a grid.

In Lion you can turn off the feature 'Automatically rearrange spaces based on the most recent use' in the Mission Control system preferences pane, and I recommend this. You must also make sure you have the right number of spaces (e.g. 9) by adding desktops using the left hand side + button when in Mission Control.

With 9 desktops set up and fixed, you can then assign your applications to them by dragging them to the right desktop and right clicking on the icon in the task bar, and choosing Options->Assign to this desktop.

Then the only problem remaining is how to navigate between the desktops as if they were in a grid, using the cursor keys.

This app attempts to solve that problem.

It is not entirely easy, because Mission Control is not scriptable. However, there is still a way to change between spaces, and to identify which space you are currently on.

h2. Installation

Download the app, and drag it into your Applications folder.  Then launch it as you would any app. 
Make sure you set your preferred layout first (see below about preferences), then if it works for you, you can safely add it to your login items.

"Change Space.app version 1.2":http://stephensykes.com/OSX/Change%20Space.app.tar.gz

h2. Usage

Change Space has a preferences window (command-,), and here you should select the kind of grid you use. (2x2, 3x2, 4x2, or 3x3)
3x3 is the default, but if you use another setting you must of course have the correct total number of desktops set up.

The keys to change spaces are ctrl-shift arrow keys. These are preset, but this may be configurable in a later version.

When you first change space, the program will run through all your desktops so it can identify them all.

h2. Known issues

Change Space cannot change to desktop 1 without sending ctrl-1 to the system. Unfortunately this doesn't work when if you are holding the shift key down at the time. So sometimes if you do not release the shift key quickly this does not work. This only affects desktop 1, I recommend you seldom use this one for this reason until we work out a solution. (I rejected using just control and the arrow keys because that is used in many other apps.)

The timing of the disappearance of the space number in the status bar should be fixed to be 2.5 seconds after the most recent desktop change.

I have seen the mapping getting mixed up, and it cycling through the desktops on every space change. If this happens, try deleting ~/Library/Caches/space_map and try it again. Also restarting the app may help (at least it did for me). At any rate, please report issues like this in github issues.

h2. Author

Stephen Sykes
Twitter: @sdsykes

h2. Licence

(c) Stephen Sykes 2011

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
 
 The software is  provided "as is", without warranty of any kind, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness. In no event shall the author(s) or copyright holder(s) be liable for any claim, damages, or other liability, whether in an action of contract, tort, or otherwise, arising from, out of, or in connection with the software or the use or other dealings in the software.
 
